---
layout: post
title: Tomcat 8.5 on Ubuntu 16.04
---

I really greatly prefer to use apt-get to manage all my installs on Ubuntu, 
however recently I wanted to install a newer version of Tomcat in a stand-alone 
configuration (e.g. running on ports 80 &amp; 443) and found that the repositories seem to 
contain only 8.0.x. So I embarked on a bit of a chase to get it working.

### Update

> I felt that I needed Tomcat 8.5, but if I had the chance I would re-examine that and 
> attempt to make do with the libraries available via apt-get.

Note to self and others before the rest of the information. I "tested" the 
initial tomcat files by running `sudo startup.sh`; needless to say 
that I later ran into issues as a number of files had been created as 
root and I was later attempting to run tomcat w/ a dedicated tomcat user. The solution in 
that case is to delete the contents of the work and tmp directories.

### References:

1. <a href="https://www.howtoforge.com/tutorial/how-to-install-apache-tomcat-8-5-on-ubuntu-16-04/">Howto Forge has a pretty complete article on this.</a>
2. <a href="http://sheroz.com/pages/blog/installing-apache-tomcat-native-linux-ubuntu-1204.html">Tomcat Native / APR</a> a
3. <a href="http://2ality.com/2010/07/running-tomcat-on-port-80-in-user.html">Tomcat on port 80 (authbind)</a>
4. <a href="http://www.journaldev.com/160/steps-to-configure-ssl-on-tomcat-and-setup-auto-redirect-from-http-to-https">Tomcat auto redirect to HTTPS</a>


If you're setting things up via systemd and `/etc/environment` then the instructions 
above about editing your ~/.bashrc file should be unneeded. 

Note that as the last bit of Step #4 the instructions c
hange the ownership back to the tomcat user and group.

In my own install, I decided to use the already existing www-data group, 
as I do not plan to install any other web server on the VM in question, so:

```bash
useradd -s /bin/false -g www-data -d /opt/tomcat tomcat
groupadd ssl-cert
usermod -aG ssl-cert tomcat
```

At this point the initial guide is ok for running on higher ports, 
but for running on protected ports such as 80 or 443, it needs some additions.

### Installation of APR and Tomcat-Native:

The instructions on the references are pretty good, just need to change the version numbers.

To get the dependencies:

```bash
apt-get install make gcc openssl libssl-dev
```

Then download, build and install the Apache APR.

Then inside of your $CATALINA_HOME/bin there should be a 
`tomcat-native-***.tar.gz` file with the correct version. Expand it, 
build and install. The configure command should look something like:

```bash
./configure --with-apr=/usr/local/apr --with-java-home=/usr/lib/jvm/java-8-oracle
```

At this point you can edit the server.xml to provide stronger "hints" 
to use the tomcat-native libs, but for now just leave it at editing the setenv.sh to contain the library path.


### Authbind

You may need to install authbind, if so go ahead and install it now (apt-get, etc).

Then

```bash
cd /etc/authbind/byport
touch {80,443}
chmod 500 {80,443}
chown tomcat:www-data {80,443}
```

There are a few differing instructions that I came across as to how to use authbind at this stage. The one that worked for me was to edit $CATALINE_HOME/bin/start.sh and change the last line to:


```bash
exec authbind --deep "$PRGDIR"/"$EXECUTABLE" start "$@"
```

At this stage, the ports for Tomcat haven't been changed, but you should be able to start 
it and check that it's running, e.g. something like `netstat -plntu`

<b>TLS Certificates </b>

In my case I was moving a real Apache OpenSSL format certificate and key to my new 
Tomcat only server. You have a number of options of where to place it, I settled on 
`/etc/ssl/private/myservername` so after loading it to the server and 
moving the folder to the location, I needed to do the following:


```bash
usermod -aG ssl-cert root</span>
chown -R root:ssl-cert /etc/ssl</span>
chmod +x /etc/ssl/private</span>
cd /etc/ssl/private/myservername</span>
chmod 640 mykey.key
```

I had already created the ssl-cert group (as per some additional info), 
and by default the /etc/ssl/private is only traversable via root, 
so it needs the chmod +x so that the other members of the ssl-cert group can access sub-folders.

<b>Editing Tomcat server.xml and web.xml</b>

Next you want to change the ports that Tomcat uses, the initial 
config will use http on port 8080 and have a couple commented out lines for various https options.

First, I went ahead and enabled the shared executor:


```xml
<Executor name="tomcatThreadPool" namePrefix="catalina-exec-" 
		maxThreads="150" minSpareThreads="4"/>
```

Then, I changed the default connector to run on port 80, redirect https to 443, and to use the executor:

```xml
<Connector port="80" protocol="HTTP/1.1" connectionTimeout="20000" executor="tomcatThreadPool" redirectPort="443" />
```

Then I enabled and configured the https connector. This is a lot easier than it used to be:

```xml
<Connector port="443" protocol="org.apache.coyote.http11.Http11AprProtocol"
		executor="tomcatThreadPool" SSLEnabled="true" >
		<UpgradeProtocol className="org.apache.coyote.http2.Http2Protocol" />
		<SSLHostConfig>
			<Certificate 
				certificateKeyFile="/etc/ssl/private/myservername/myserver.key"     
				certificateFile="/etc/ssl/private/myservername/myserver.crt"     
				certificateChainFile="/etc/ssl/private/myservername/geotrust.crt"     
				type="RSA" />
		</SSLHostConfig>
</Connector>
```

At this point, everything should be running ok. However I had one more smaller 
change to make. In my case, I wanted to ensure that all requests ran on 
https. Previously this had been handled by an Apache mod_rewrite rule 
for the web-app's path. In the new configuration the web-app is 
deployed via ROOT.war to be the root (and only) web-app on this server. I could have 
redeployed to with internal edits, but found that it was at least 
as easy to edit the $CATALINA_HOME/conf/web.xml file to add the following at the end of that file:

```xml
<security-constraint>
	<web-resource-collection>
		<web-resource-name>Entire Application</web-resource-name>
		<url-pattern>/*</url-pattern>
	</web-resource-collection>
	<user-data-constraint>
		<transport-guarantee>CONFIDENTIAL</transport-guarantee>
	</user-data-constraint>
</security-constraint>
```

###Logrotate:

Finally we don't want to forget about the catalina.out file. All the other 
Tomcat and web-app logs on this instance all use internal rotation logic, 
so the main concern is the catalina.out.


```bash
cd /etc/logrotate.d</span>
touch tomcat</span>
nano tomcat</span></blockquote>

Then add something like the following:


```bash
/opt/tomcat/logs/catalina.out { 
    copytruncate 
	daily 
	rotate 7 
	compress 
	missingok 
	size 5M 
	create 640 tomcat www-data
}
```

At this point, if you do need to upgrade tomcat it will be a bit of a pain, 
although less painful than the install. Basically you'll need to download a new version, 
merge the ./bin and ./conf changes; then ensure that you have updated the 
APR and rebuild the tomcat-native library to ensure that they are the versions 
that the new Tomcat expects. Typically if your JDK changes you'll also want to 
rebuilt to avoid any nasty suprizes.

